# Wykład - 19.03.2024

Sun shine strong -> net ballance of biosphere is negative (17.14). Antropogenic changes in bioshpere is low in the night.
Temperature inversion

Simplified model in the july and in december.

------- Lecture 3 File

Seminar in polish - numerical weather forcasting, friday

Structure of Atmosphere:
- Layered structure of the atmosphere
- Classification cryteria:
- - Dynamics (surface layer boundary layer, free atmosphere, oznonosphere)
  - Chemical composition (homosphere, heterosphere, ozonosphere) 
  - Temperature (troposphere, sta\ratosphere, mezosphere, termosphere) - temperature gradient - vortesies - convection surpheres:
    - troposphere (ends tropopause):
    - stratosphere:
      - Impotant stuff happens here

Trace gases - Are not harmful, hoever thay control climate on earth:
! Nitrogen, !Oxygen, !Argon <- Everytnig apart of this:

- Carbon dioxode
- Methand
- Nitrus oxide

- Ionoshpere not important XD

-----

Magnetosphere - almost no gases, strong magnetic field


Close to the surface:
- Driver of the transport atmosphere dynamics: Sun shine (energy). - Not equal heating of the atmosphere and then changes in preasure, winds (air movements).
- Gravity (vertical profile of the atmosphere) - Pascal law - Barometric equation - preasure at the certain height.
- Colorists forces, makes the picture on the slide. Cyclon - low presure. Wind from the high to the low.
- Clockwise - height pressure system
- Friction, viscosity, chemical composition, (latent heat flux).

Model:

- Mean temperature of the planet (Energy from the dsun is the same as the one readiating of the planet).
- Planet do not apbsorb everthing, we can see the planet on the moon (Albido parameter).
- Rest is absorbed. Ideal black body theory (Long wave radiation - earth is colder of the sun - length of the magnetic wave is longer)
- S — capital constant, (1 - Albida (A)). --- divide by circle because of our model si 2D like a area of circle is 1/4 the one of the sphere.
- Comparison of fluxed Pz = PSŁ
S - solar constant; Stephan bolthzman constant.
- Difference is the atmosphere, the temperature on earth is not -17.2 C
- Atmposphere captures heat. C02, Methane, water vapour (Caputere infrared readiation).
- Latent heat flux — transport of temperature of water- water needs a lot of energy to change state.

-------------------

Non-linear equations — Dimensionless energy balance
We can change the solar constant:
 - changes in planet orbit
 - changes in solar cycle

-10 Celsius, is bc the water on earth is solid, and it changes to solid at that temperature, not at zero Celsius.

Dispersion models:
- Eulerain - aproeach
- Lagrangian
- Hybride
- Gaussian - Gausian plum model, solution of the transport equation under strong simplifying assumptions:
  - No chemical transportaiton of the polutants.
  - assumption, the only official -- Polish law act, ministy of enviorment, methology. 2010